README.md, before:

# Get Array Module

This package is an implementation for NumPy's `get_array_module` proposal.
This proposal is written up in [NEP 37](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0037-array-module.html).


### Important Note

**The API implemented here includes certain arguments that are *not* currenlty part of NEP 37.**
These enable things that may never be part of the final implementation.
There are three reasons for this:

1. The implementation here **requires explicit Opt-In** by the end-user
   because this was an early thought when scikit-learn experimented with
   using this type of functionality.
   It is unclear whether this is a desirable, and may also depend on other
   API choices.
2. To allow to see how a transition may look like and can be implemented.
3. To provide library authors with the flexibility to try various models.
   It is not clear that library authors should have the option to limit
   which array-modules are acceptable.
4. See how context managers on the user-side can be designed to deal with
   opt-in and transitions.

Both of these *could* be part of the API, or we could provide help for how to
implement them in a specific library, but the default is more likely for them
to not be part of it at this time.

Especially point 2 is my own thought, and mostly an option I want library
authors to be aware of.

If libraries choose to use option 2., I could imagine it makes sense for them
to allow users to extend the "acceptable-array-modules" list manually.
That way a library can limit itself to tested array types while not limiting
the users to try and use different array-types at their own risk.


## For End-Users

End users will not use much of the module, except to enable the behaviour
to begin with or get control over `FutureWarnings`.
In some cases a library is also a (localized) end-user.

For end users, there are two functionalities available:
```python
import numpy_dispatch

numpy_dispatch.enable_dispatching_globally()
```
To globally enable dispatching. This function is meant to be called
*exactly* once and *only* by the end-user.
Calling the function more than once currently gives a warning.
The global switch *cannot* be disabled.

In some cases local control may be necessary. Locally enabling dispatching
can be achieved in a thread-safe manner by using:
```python
import numpy_dispatch

with numpy_dispatch.ensure_dispatching():
    dispatching_aware_library_function(arr1, arr2)
```
We currently assume that disabling dispatching is never necessary.
To effectively disable dispatching, it will be necessary to cast all inputs
to NumPy arrays.


## For library authors

Library authors are the main audience for this, the central function
is `get_array_module`. A typical use case may look like this:

```python
import numpy as np

try:
    from numpy_dispatch import get_array_module
except
    # Simply use NumPy if unavailable
    get_array_module = lambda *args, **kwargs: np


def library_function(arr1, arr2, **other_parameters):
    npx = get_array_module(arr1, arr2)

    arr1 = npx.asarray(arr1)
    arr2 = npx.asarray(arr2)

    # use npx instead of all numpy code
```

If your library has internal helper functions, the best way to write these
is probably:
```python
def internal_helper(*args, npx=np):
   # old code, but replace `np` with `npx`.
```
That way the module is passed around in a safe manner. If your library calls
into other libraries which may or may not dispatch (or even dispatch in the
future), it is probably best to ensure that all types tidy so that dispatching
is not expected to make a difference if enabled.
Remember, you do _not_ have control to _disable_ dispatching.


### More finegrained control

To enable transition towards allowing certain or all types, there are a few
additional options, for example:
```python
npx = get_array_module(*arrays, modules="numpy", future_modules="dask.array")
```
could be a spelling to say that currently NumPy is fully supported, and `dask`
is supported, but the support will warn (the user can silence the warning).

Giving `future_modules=None` would allow any and all module to be returned,
note that in general `modules=None` is probably the desired end result.

Please see the below section for details on how a transition can look like
currently.

Library authors further have the option to provide the `default`, in case the
library is originally written for something other than NumPy.
Additionally, since some libraries may want to always use dispatching as
a design choice, `enabled={True, None}` can currently be passed in.
Disabling dispatching is currently specifically not supported.


## Transitioning for users and libraries

The `future_modules` keyword argument is a way to transition users (enabling
new dispatching).
When such a transition happens two things change:

1. When no array-module can be found because none of the array types
   understands the others, a `default` has to be returned during
   a transition phase, this can be done using `fallback="warn"`.
2. `future_modules` allows to implement new modules, but not use them
   by default (give a `FutureWarning` instead).

In both cases, to opt-out of the change, the user will have to cast their
input arrays.
To opt-in to the new changes (error in 1., dispatching in 2.), the user
can locally use the context manager:
```python
from numpy_dispatch import future_dispatch_behavior

with future_dispatch_behavior():
    library_function_doing_a_transition()
```

### Library during transition

A typical use-case should be a library transitioning from not supporting
array-module, to supporting array-module always.
This can currently be implemented by using:

```python
npx = get_array_module(*arrays,
            modules="numpy", future_modules=None, fallback="warn")
npx.asarray(arrays[0])  # etc.
```
For a library that used to just call `np.asarray()` *during transition* and
```
npx = get_array_module(*arrays)
```
when the transition is done.

There are no additional features to allow an array-library to transition
to implementing `__array_module__`. Such a library will need to give a
generic `FutureWarning` and create its own context manager to opt-in to the
new behaviour.


## Array object implementors

Please read [NEP 37](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0037-array-module.html).
The only addition here is that `module.__name__` has to return a good
and stable name to be used by libraries.


# Testing!

To allow some (silly) testing there are two functionalities to make it
a bit simpler:

```python
from numpy_dispatch import dummy  # will give a warning

# Create a dummy array, that returns its own module, although that
# module effectively is just NumPy. The dummy array accepts only NumPy
# arrays aside from itself.
dummy.array([1, 2, 3])

# Add `__array_module__` which accepts the given types as types that
# it can understand. This example is with cupy (untested), which is
# probably the best module to test:
import cupy
dummy.inject_array_module(cupy.ndarray, (np.ndarray, dummy.DummyArray,),
                          module=cupy)
```

Commit message:

API: Rename `enabled` to `opt_in` and make default False
The default is thus reversed to what it was before

README.md, after:

# Get Array Module

This package is an implementation for NumPy's `get_array_module` proposal.
This proposal is written up in [NEP 37](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0037-array-module.html).


### Important Note

**The API implemented here includes certain arguments that are *not* currenlty part of NEP 37.**
These enable things that may never be part of the final implementation.
There are three reasons for this:

1. The first implementation required explicit Opt-In by the user by either
   enabling dispatching globally or using a context manager. This has been
   reversed: A library can require Opt-In, but dispatching is the default.
2. To allow to see how a transition may look like and can be implemented.
3. To provide library authors with the flexibility to try various models.
   It is not clear that library authors should have the option to limit
   which array-modules are acceptable.
4. See how context managers on the user-side can be designed to deal with
   opt-in and transitions.

Both of these *could* be part of the API, or we could provide help for how to
implement them in a specific library, but the default is more likely for them
to not be part of it at this time.

Especially point 2 is my own thought, and mostly an option I want library
authors to be aware of.

If libraries choose to use option 2., I could imagine it makes sense for them
to allow users to extend the "acceptable-array-modules" list manually.
That way a library can limit itself to tested array types while not limiting
the users to try and use different array-types at their own risk.


## For End-Users

End users will not use much of the module, except to enable the behaviour
(which is only necessary if a library explicitly requires it!)
or control `FutureWarnings`.
In some cases a library is also a (localized) end-user.

For end users, there are thus two functionalities available:
```python
import numpy_dispatch

numpy_dispatch.enable_dispatching_globally()
```
To Opt-In globally for all libraries which require explicit Opt-In.
This function is meant to be called
*exactly* once and *only* by the end-user.
Calling the function more than once currently gives a warning.
The global switch *cannot* be disabled.
A user of this flag must be prepared for changes in behaviour e.g. when
updating downstream libraries.

Local control is more safe and may be required in some cases.
Locally enabling dispatching can be achieved in a thread-safe manner by using:
```python
import numpy_dispatch

with numpy_dispatch.ensure_dispatching():
    dispatching_aware_library_function(arr1, arr2)
```
We currently assume that disabling dispatching is not necessary
(once enabled within a context/globally).
Effectively, disabling is only possible by converting all inputs to NumPy
arrays.

This control over dispatching behaviour using a context manager may be useful
in libraries.


## For library authors

Library authors are the main audience for this, the central function
is `get_array_module`. A typical use case may look like this:

```python
import numpy as np

try:
    from numpy_dispatch import get_array_module
except
    # Simply use NumPy if unavailable
    get_array_module = lambda *args, **kwargs: np


def library_function(arr1, arr2, **other_parameters):
    npx = get_array_module(arr1, arr2)

    arr1 = npx.asarray(arr1)
    arr2 = npx.asarray(arr2)

    # use npx instead of all numpy code
```

If your library has internal helper functions, the best way to write these
is probably:
```python
def internal_helper(*args, npx=np):
   # old code, but replace `np` with `npx`.
```
That way the module is passed around in a safe manner. If your library calls
into other libraries which may or may not dispatch (or even dispatch in the
future), it is probably best to ensure that all types tidy so that dispatching
is not expected to make a difference if enabled.
Remember, you do _not_ have control to _disable_ dispatching.


### More finegrained control

To enable transition towards allowing certain or all types, there are a few
additional options, for example:
```python
npx = get_array_module(*arrays, modules="numpy", future_modules="dask.array")
```
could be a spelling to say that currently NumPy is fully supported, and `dask`
is supported, but the support will warn (the user can silence the warning).

Giving `future_modules=None` would allow any and all module to be returned,
note that in general `modules=None` is probably the desired end result.

Please see the below section for details on how a transition can look like
currently.

Library authors further have the option to provide the `default`, in case the
library is originally written for something other than NumPy.

Additionally, since some libraries may want to disable the use of dispatching
without explicit opt-in as a design choice (or maybe during an experimental
stage).  These libraries can use `opt_in=False` to signal this.


## Transitioning for users and libraries

The `future_modules` keyword argument is a way to transition users (enabling
new dispatching).
When such a transition happens two things change:

1. When no array-module can be found because none of the array types
   understands the others, a `default` has to be returned during
   a transition phase, this can be done using `fallback="warn"`.
2. `future_modules` allows to implement new modules, but not use them
   by default (give a `FutureWarning` instead).

In both cases, to opt-out of the change, the user will have to cast their
input arrays.
To opt-in to the new changes (error in 1., dispatching in 2.), the user
can locally use the context manager:
```python
from numpy_dispatch import future_dispatch_behavior

with future_dispatch_behavior():
    library_function_doing_a_transition()
```

### Library during transition

A typical use-case should be a library transitioning from not supporting
array-module, to supporting array-module always.
This can currently be implemented by using:

```python
npx = get_array_module(*arrays,
            modules="numpy", future_modules=None, fallback="warn")
npx.asarray(arrays[0])  # etc.
```
For a library that used to just call `np.asarray()` *during transition* and
```
npx = get_array_module(*arrays)
```
when the transition is done.

There are no additional features to allow an array-library to transition
to implementing `__array_module__`. Such a library will need to give a
generic `FutureWarning` and create its own context manager to opt-in to the
new behaviour.


## Array object implementors

Please read [NEP 37](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0037-array-module.html).
The only addition here is that `module.__name__` has to return a good
and stable name to be used by libraries.


# Testing!

To allow some (silly) testing there are two functionalities to make it
a bit simpler:

```python
from numpy_dispatch import dummy  # will give a warning

# Create a dummy array, that returns its own module, although that
# module effectively is just NumPy. The dummy array accepts only NumPy
# arrays aside from itself.
dummy.array([1, 2, 3])

# Add `__array_module__` which accepts the given types as types that
# it can understand. This example is with cupy (untested), which is
# probably the best module to test:
import cupy
dummy.inject_array_module(cupy.ndarray, (np.ndarray, dummy.DummyArray,),
                          module=cupy)
```
